What if your problem does not
conform to a standard use case?
Let's say we want to compute
the maximum difference between
old and new temperatures.
For instance, the first object
cooled from 42 to 31 degrees,
which is an 11 degree change,
but the last one cooled from 50
to 35, a difference of 15 degrees.
So the maximum
difference is 15 degrees.
There's no standard algorithm
for computing this though.
A naive approach would be
to compute each stage of the
algorithm as illustrated.
To do this, we start by creating
a vector for differences.
Then we use the version of thrust
transform to take two input ranges,
one for the old temperatures
and one for the new temperatures.
Our operation, a lambda or a
function object, now receives two
parameters, one from each range,
computes the absolute difference
between them, and writes the
result into the differences vector.
Lastly, we run a max reduction
on the differences vector to find
the maximum absolute difference.
This code will produce the correct
result, but is it efficient?
To answer this question,
let's recap the key steps
of this algorithm.
It starts with an allocation,
which is already suboptimal.
After that, it transforms two
input ranges into differences.
To build an intuition for
this step, you can consider
the transformation as a
for loop shown here.
Inside this loop, we read two
elements, one from A and one from
B. We then compute the difference
and write it back into memory.
Overall this step reads
two N elements and
writes N elements back.
The subsequent reduction step can
be represented as another for loop.
Here it reads one element from the
difference array, checks if the
newly read value is larger Then the
current max value and updates the
current max value if it's the case.
Overall, this approach leads
to 3n reads, where n is the
size of the input sequence.
It also writes back n elements.
The question is, if you had
to implement this algorithm
with just 4 loops, would you
write it this way?
To make this more efficient,
we can rewrite the logic using
a single reduction loop.
Instead of computing all the
absolute differences ahead of time,
we can calculate them on the fly
as we iterate through the elements
of A and B and immediately compare
each result to the current maximum.
This approach only reads two
N elements, each element of
A and B once, and avoids any
extra memory allocations.
Since it cuts memory accesses in
half, we'd expect a noticeable
performance gain.
So the natural question is,
how can we implement this
on-the-fly computation using
a parallel algorithm?
And which parallel
algorithm should we use?
Thankfully, this part
is straightforward.
Our loop already behaves like
a standard reduction, except
we're reducing absolute differences
rather than raw values.
That means the right tool
is Thrust Reduce.
But how do we plug the
absolute difference logic
into Thrust Reduce?
The answer lies in iterators.
And if you're not familiar
with them yet, don't worry,
we'll cover the essentials
The simplest way to understand
iterators is to start with
something familiar, pointers.
In this example, we allocate
the array with three elements,
then create a pointer that
points to the first element.
Using the subscript operator,
brackets, we can access elements of
the array through the pointer, just
like we would with a regular array.
This works because pointers
act as basic iterators over
a sequence of values in memory.
Here's a simple mental model
for understanding pointers.
A pointer stores a memory
address, the location of some
data in physical memory.
In addition to storing that
address, pointers provide
an array-like interface for
accessing the data.
For example, accessing index
0 through a pointer gives
you the first element, index
1 gives you the second, and so on.
Each step moves through memory
based on the data type's size.
But the subscript operator isn't
limited to pointers and arrays.
If you think about how we
access elements in thrust
vector or std vector, we use
the same square bracket notation.
Why does that work?
Because in C++ we can define the
subscript operator, the brackets,
just like any other function.
In other words, when you write
vector at index 42, 42 is
passed as a parameter to the
subscript operator function
inside the vector class.
This flexibility allows us to give
many objects pointer-like behavior,
which brings us to iterators.
Since we can put any code in
the subscript operator, we don't
have to limit ourselves to the
concept of physical memory at all.
For example, imagine a type
whose subscript operator just
returns whatever index you pass in.
Pass it 42, you get 42.
That might seem pointless
at first, but by the end of
this course, this little trick will
become one of your best friends.
So now let's compare the
pointer-based code on the left
with our custom type on the right.
When we pass in an index
of 0, both print 0.
When we pass in an index of
1, both print 1, and so on.
Functionally,
there's no difference.
But because a pointer is tied to
actual physical memory, every time
you use the subscript operator,
you're performing a memory access.
That means if you read N elements,
you'll have N memory accesses.
Our custom type, on the other hand,
simply returns the index you passed
in with no memory access at all.
In theory, that can give much
better performance.
And from the algorithm's point of
view, notice how both interfaces
look exactly the same.
We just use square brackets.
Whether those brackets trigger
a memory read or simply return
the index doesn't matter for
the rest of the code.
And that's a key concept behind
how iterators work.
You can think of iterators as
a generalization of pointers.
They provide the same interface,
think subscript operator,
increment, et cetera, but
they are not limited to
actual memory accesses.
The type we just explored is
called a counting iterator.
It presents an infinite
sequence of integers without
allocating a single byte.
Here's its code just to help build
a mental model, but you won't
ever need to write one yourself.
It's the concept that's important.
The counting iterator we
just saw doesn't make any
memory accesses, but not
every iterator works that way.
For example, imagine a transform
iterator that references an
underlying pointer.
Every time you call its subscript
operator, instead of returning
the original element directly,
it might multiply that element
by 2 before giving it back.
From the outside, it looks like
the entire sequence was scaled.
If you look at index 1, you get 2.
Even though the underlying
data still stores one.
Notice that the result
of the multiplication
isn't stored anywhere.
It's computed on the fly each
time you access an element.
We can take this even further by
implementing a zip iterator that
references two sequences at once.
Its subscript operator returns
a tuple containing one element
from each sequence.
So if we access the iterator
at index zero, We might get
05, which corresponds
exactly to A0 and B0.
The real power of these so-called
fancy iterators shows up when
we start combining them.
For example, imagine a
transform iterator that
uses a zip iterator inside.
Each time you call its subscript
operator with index i, it
first fetches two values,
one from sequence A and one from
sequence B, then computes their
absolute difference and returns it.
That's exactly what we needed for
our maximum difference algorithm.
If we pass the transformed zip
iterator to a reduction algorithm,
it'll treat it just like a regular
pointer and read values as usual.
But under the hood, every
access fetches two elements,
computes the absolute difference,
and hands it over.
All of that without
writing those intermediate
differences back to memory.
In reality, production-grade
iterator implementations are
much more complex than these
simplified examples.
Luckily, you don't have to
build them yourself.
Thrust already provides a variety
of ready-to-use iterators,
including counting zip and
transform iterators.
Let's take a look at how to
work with those in practice.
Thrust makeCountingIterator
takes an integer that tells
it where to start counting.
For example, in this code, we
pass it into thrust for each
to print out the first 42 elements.
If we create a counting iterator
that starts at 1, the output will
be 1, 2, 3, and so on up to 42.
Thrust make transform iterator
takes two inputs, an iterator
to your underlying data and
a transformation function
to apply to each element.
For example, suppose we have
a thrust vector containing
a sequence like 1, 2, 3.
We pass the beginning of the
vector as the first argument
and a function that doubles
each value as the second.
When we iterate over the resulting
transform iterator, each element
is automatically multiplied
Divided by two on the fly.
So if the original data was
one, two, three, four, the
transform iterator yields
two, four, six, eight.
Importantly, these transform
values are not stored in memory.
They're computed dynamically
whenever the iterator is accessed.
Now let's take a look at an example
using thrust make zip iterator.
We have two thrust
vectors, A and B.
The first one holds 0, 1, 2
and the second holds 5, 4, 2.
We then call thrust, make
zip iterator A begin, B begin
to create an iterator that pairs
up elements from both vectors.
The element at index zero of
A is zipped with the element
at index zero of B and so on.
That gives us sequence of
pairs like 0, 5, 1, 4, 2, 2.
As we discussed, our plan
for the maximum difference
problem is to combine a zip
iterator with a transform iterator.
In this code, we do exactly that.
First, we use make zip iterator
on a A begin and B begin.
That gives us an iterator which at
each index returns a tuple of two
floats, one from A and one from B.
Next, we pass that zip iterator
into make transform iterator
along with a lambda function.
Because the zip iterator returns
a tuple of floats, that's
exactly what the lambda function
should have as a parameter.
For each tuple, we extract
the two values using thrust
get, compute the absolute
difference, and return that result.
So, for the first
elements in A and B,
If the tuple is 0, 5, the
transform iterator returns
absolute of 0 minus 5, which is 5.
From the reduction's
perspective, it's just
reading a single float each time.
But behind the scenes, our
transform iterator grabs two
floats, one from A and one
from B, calculates the difference
on the fly, and returns the result
without any extra reads or writes.
So in total, we only need two N
memory accesses, which is exactly
the improvement we aimed for.
Now let's see if this reduced
memory traffic actually
improves performance.
In this graph, we have
normalized elapsed time
for different vector sizes.
You can see that using fancy
iterators is about twice as
fast as storing the temporary
differences in memory.
And this comparison doesn't even
include the cost of allocating
space for those temporary arrays.
If we factor in the allocation
overhead, the speedup could
climb to 70 times, but performance
isn't the only benefit.
Fancy iterators also drastically
reduce memory usage.
For instance, if your GPU
has eight gigabytes of memory
and each vector takes up four
gigabytes, then you've essentially
used up all available space
by just storing A and B. In that
scenario, a materializing approach,
which needs extra storage for the
difference vector, that would fail.
Meanwhile, the fancy iterator-based
version requires no extra
space and would work just fine.
Most of the parallel
algorithms we've seen
so far are very challenging
to implement efficiently.
That's why it's crucial to
understand how to adapt the
accelerated libraries to your
unique use cases without having
to re-implement them.
In this exercise, we want
to calculate the variance
of a temperature data set,
which requires us to compute
the squared difference of
each element from the mean.
A naive approach would create
a whole new buffer in memory
to store these squared differences,
which wastes both time and space.
Instead, since you now know
how to handle this using fancy
iterators, you'll compute There may
be squared differences on the fly.
Feeding them straight into
the reduction without ever
creating a separate array.
In the code snippet, you'll
see a placeholder for
squared differences.
Your task is to replace the
placeholder with a transform
iterator that computes the squared
There are specific differences
between each element and the mean.